[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: We need to
give people the information.
[APPLAUSE]
>> now the host of the
nationally syndicated "Coast
to Coast AM" and Gaiam TV
bring you "Beyond Belief"
with George Noory.
>>NOORY: Well welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
it's great to have
you with us today.
Now, normally, I
don't walk around
with a bag of
cornflakes with me,
but tonight's program is
very special and unusual.
This is genetically
modified, which
means that it's been altered.
It's been changed.
To me, is it real food?
In a moment you're going
to hear from a very
special guest of mine as
we talk about genetically
modified foods.
I'd like to introduce you to
our very special guest Jeffrey
Smith.
Jeffrey is an
expert in GMO foods.
Let's welcome Jeffrey Smith.
[APPLAUSE]
It's good to see you.
Oh, by the way, Jeff, don't
say I never bought you lunch.
>>JEFFREY SMITH: Thank you.
I'll just leave it here for now.
>>NOORY: How are you?
>>SMITH: Doing great.
>>NOORY: What's new with you?
>>SMITH: Well, I just
spent a lot of time
in California trying to get Prop
37 past for labeling of GMOs.
>>NOORY: Did not work.
>>SMITH: Did not work.
There was a big disinformation
campaign, a million a day.
So people bought into
that story and said
we don't want GMOs labeled
because it'll do this, this,
and this, and this.
All of that was a lie.
>>NOORY: What normal
person would not
vote for something that would
say this food has been labeled
with it or without?
Why did it go down in defeat?
>>SMITH: It wasn't a
referendum on whether GMOs
should be labeled.
Because 9 out of 10
Americans and Californians
still want that.
But the other side twisted it
and said if you pass Prop 37,
it's going to raise your
grocery bill by $400.
That's not true.
61 countries have
labeling, didn't go up.
It's going to create lawsuits.
It's going to be
bad for farmers,
bad for small businesses.
It's a poorly
written proposition
that has exemptions
by special interests.
All that was concocted
by the public relations
firms in the biotech
industry's back room
to say how can we
convince people
to vote against their
best self-interest.
>>NOORY: And they
were very successful.
>>SMITH: Very successful, yes.
>>NOORY: OK.
When you were a little boy,
you didn't grow up saying,
you know what, I'm going to deal
with genetically modified foods
when I grow up.
How in the heck did
this happen for you?
>>SMITH: Well, I
went to a lecture
by a molecular biologist who
was an expert genetic engineer.
In 1996, he was
appalled that they
were about to release the
products of this infant science
to the entire population and
put it in the environment where
there was no way to recall
the self-propagating genetic
pollution, because the
pollen will just transfer.
He knew from a technical basis
why the technology was not
ready for prime time.
He knew it would cause
unpredicted side effects.
It could hurt people.
And when I heard his
information, which
was presented very
technically, I
said people need
to hear about this.
And I realized I was
talking to myself.
So I started interviewing
him and other scientists
and translating the
science into English
so that other people could
understand what was going on.
>>NOORY: I swear, when I
was in a store years ago
and bought some
tomatoes, they must
have been genetically modified.
They tasted like cardboard.
>>SMITH: Well, there was
genetically modified tomatoes
in '94, '95, and '96.
And they didn't taste too
good, so they actually
were taken off the market.
There's no more genetically
modified tomatoes
because of market rejection.
Same thing with the potatoes.
But there's still nine
genetically modified food crops
out there.
And because soy and corn
are genetically engineered,
and sugar from
sugar beets, they're
in most processed foods.
>>NOORY: Jeffrey, this
is just an example
of some GMO-type foods, right?
How do they make this stuff?
>>SMITH: All right.
So this corn is
genetically engineered
with corn that produces
its own toxic insecticide.
It produces a protein that
breaks open holes in the cell
walls of insects to kill them.
Now the biotech industry
swore up and down
this will never happen
to humans or mammals.
But in 2012, in
February, a study
was released showing it does
poke holes in human cells.
>>NOORY: Oh, boy.
>>SMITH: And in 2011, another
one of their assumptions--
which was, oh, don't
worry, the BT toxin,
which is what it's called--
is destroyed in human digestion.
Well it was found in the
blood of 93% of pregnant women
and in 80% of their
unborn fetuses.
If we eat this corn
chip and the BTG--
>>NOORY: I dare you to eat that.
>>SMITH: No way.
>>NOORY: No, you won't it.
>>SMITH: This is
non-food for me, George.
If the gene that
produces the BT toxin
transfers into the DNA
of our gut bacteria
and continues to
function, it means
it converts our intestinal
flora into living pesticide
factories.
And I think that's why 93%
of pregnant women in Canada
had the BT toxin in
their blood, because it
was being produced continuously
inside our digestive tract.
When I say this to doctors
at medical conferences,
they say this might
explain the increase
in gastrointestinal
disorders we're
seeing on the rise in the US.
I have interviewed doctors
who prescribe non-GMO diets
to all their patients.
And there are thousands of
doctors that do just that.
We also solicit case
studies from people.
So I've talked to
hundreds of people
who say that they're
getting better
from a variety of
symptoms, sometimes
eliminate those
symptoms altogether.
Someone in a doctor's
office told me 25 days
into a non-GMO diet, third
day, no more Crohn's disease
after 30 years.
Lost 10 pounds and the skin
condition started clearing up.
We have immune system problems,
reproductive problems,
and gastrointestinal
problems that
tend to clear up very quickly.
>>NOORY: What's your definition,
Jeffrey, of organic food?
>>SMITH: Well, organic is very
clearly defined by the USDA.
But one of the things
that's most important to me
is that it's not allowed to
intentionally use genetically
engineered ingredients.
So when I want to avoid
GMOs, I'll look at a product
and see does it have
the organic seal
or does it say made with organic
ingredients on the front.
And then I know that
if there is GMOs,
it's a very tiny amount
of contamination.
>>NOORY: Are the companies
responsible for GMO
foods trying to get
labeling for organic foods
where they can sell
GMO foods as organic?
Are they trying for that?
>>SMITH: They tried
for that years ago.
And over 300,000 people
protested saying hands off
of our organic food.
So I don't see them
giving up that strength.
Organic means non-GMO.
That's pretty solid.
>>NOORY: Let's go
back a long time ago.
How did they conceive this?
And what was the reason why?
>>SMITH: There's a company that
sells an herbicide, the most
popular herbicide in the world.
And their patent was
expiring in 2000.
And so they wanted Roundup
Herbicide to continue to sell.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>SMITH: And so they
created a Roundup Ready Seed
where you sold the
seed and you could
spray the whole field
with Roundup Herbicide
and not kill the
particular crop.
And they said if
you buy our seed,
and you have to
buy our herbicide.
So it extended the dominance
of that herbicide after--
>>NOORY: In terms of business,
was that a smart approach?
Probably.
>>SMITH: Absolutely, absolutely.
>>NOORY: Genius.
>>SMITH: I mean it made
them billions of dollars.
They could sell
the seeds and then
they dominated the seed
market, raised the prices.
And it made weeding
easier for farmers
because they could just
spray the field with Roundup
and kill all of the other
plant biodiversity, but not
the Roundup Ready crops.
Now Roundup, it turns
out, is very dangerous.
They fed rats a tiny amount of
Roundup in the drinking water,
less than what is considered
maximum in the United States.
And they gave it for
their entire lives.
Huge, multiple massive
tumors as much as 25%
of their body weight.
They died at two or
three times the rate.
And they had organ damage.
>>NOORY: Isn't
this kind of scary?
>>SMITH: Well, you know, I
deal with this all the time
and I don't get scared.
But I'll tell you when
I speak to audiences--
>>NOORY: But you
don't eat this stuff.
>>SMITH: That's true.
That's true.
And it's tough to speak
to young parents who
have kids that have
trouble and they
realize that the
trouble with the kids
may be because of what
they've been feeding them.
>>NOORY: Have a cookie.
>>SMITH: Thank you anyway.
>>NOORY: There was
a farmer in Canada.
He was a canola
oil farmer, right?
He would plant canola seeds.
He got involved in a
lawsuit with Monsanto.
What happened there?
>>SMITH: Well, he's
been saving seeds year
after year for 50 years.
And the neighbors planted
Roundup Ready canola.
And trucks passed by
his farm where the seeds
blew onto his property.
>>NOORY: They just blew over.
>>SMITH: Yeah.
So when he sprayed Roundup
near some telephone poles
to kill the weeds, it
turns out there was
some canola that didn't die.
And that was the
contaminated variety.
So he did what he did
every single year.
He harvested his seeds.
He saved some and replanted it.
And that violated the law
according to Monsanto,
because he was planting
their intellectual property.
>>NOORY: Did he lose?
>>SMITH: He lost.
>>NOORY: Ah.
>>SMITH: And the court
said it didn't matter.
It was accidental.
It could be wind.
It could be insects.
But because it was Monsanto's
intellectual property,
he had to, essentially,
give up all of his crops
to Monsanto as punishment for
just doing the same thing he'd
been doing for 50 years.
>>NOORY: Unbelievable.
Jeffrey, we are interactive
on "Beyond Belief."
We've got a great
studio audience.
We're going to take
some questions for you.
And let's start with somebody.
Just show your hands.
>>AUDIENCE: Is there
any genetic engineering
that could be positive or safe?
>>SMITH: I don't discount
the ability for some day
to genetically engineer
crops for the betterment
of human health and
the environment.
But as one scientist
said, put it back
in the laboratory
for 50 to 100 years
till you've done your homework.
Now you can genetically
engineer human genes
and correct a defective gene.
And that person will risk
their lives with this procedure
and some have died,
but it's not putting it
into the environment
where it can't be recalled
or feeding it to
every individual.
You can use genetic
engineering in factories
to produce pharmaceuticals.
And if they respect what can go
wrong, and they do it properly,
that could be very beneficial.
But to put it into food
or to put it outdoors
is simply not
responsible at this time.
>>AUDIENCE: Who
supports the research?
I mean is there good
private research
or is it all through the market?
>>SMITH: Unfortunately,
the vast majority
of the research done on
GMOs is done by the company
that is selling the GMO.
Now in the United
States, the government
doesn't require a single
safety study for the FDA.
You see, the person in charge
of policy for GMOs at the FDA
was a former attorney to
the biotech industry, later
a biotech executive,
and now back
at the FDA as the
US food safety czar.
When he was in charge,
Michael Taylor,
he said no testing is
necessary, no labeling
is necessary because we're
not aware of any information
showing that GMOs--
>>NOORY: Wasn't
Michael Taylor working
for one of those GMO companies?
>>SMITH: Yes. exactly.
Before and after.
>>NOORY: Whoa.
Go figure.
>>SMITH: Yeah, really.
Fox guarding the henhouse,
owning the henhouse.
And it turns out that the
concept that the FDA was not
aware of information showing
that GMOs was different--
which was the foundation of this
abdication of responsibility--
was a complete fabrication.
If you look at the 44,000 secret
internal memos made public
from a lawsuit--
>>NOORY: How many?
>>SMITH: 44,000.
>>NOORY: Secret memos.
>>SMITH: Secret memos.
They were made public from
a lawsuit against the FDA.
You can read them, as I have.
They said we have to
test these things,
because they can create
allergens, toxins,
new diseases,
nutritional problems.
They complained about the
policy of Michael Taylor.
>>NOORY: Now in a
moment, we'll come back
with more of your questions
from the audience.
But I have just a few more
here for you, Jeffrey,
before we take a break.
What's happening right now?
Is anybody fighting this?
I mean where are the
class action lawsuits?
What's going on?
>>SMITH: Someone tried to get
a class action lawsuit out
of a judge.
And the judge refused.
It turns out the
judge used to work
for one of the biotech companies
as their lawyer of record
and never recused himself.
We do have a situation now
where there's so many people
unwilling to put these
foods in their mouths
that it's having an economic
pressure on the industry.
And that, I think,
is our saving grace.
In Europe, when
the gag order was
lifted on a scientist who
had discovered that GMO were
dangerous, over
700 articles were
written within a single
month in the UK alone.
Within 10 weeks, the tipping
point of consumer rejection
was achieved.
And Unilever, and
Nestles, and Hershey's,
they all said no GMOs
in our European brands.
But it was not covered
in the United States.
And so they continue
to sell us the GMOs
that they've removed from
their products in Europe.
But we think as little
as 5% of the US shoppers
avoiding GMO
ingredients would be
sufficient to create a tipping
point of consumer rejection.
And we think we're on
the way to achieve that.
And the signs of
that are very clear.
Non-GMO labels are one of
the fastest growing label
claims in America.
For example, you have on
is this a bag here, it
has Non-GMO Project Verified.
So if you see this, you know
that it's been third-party
verified as non-GMO.
>>NOORY: I like that.
That's important.
I want to come back to
these products in a moment.
We're going to continue with
"Beyond Belief" with Jeffrey
Smith in just a moment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[APPLAUSE]
And welcome back
to "Beyond Belief,"
I'm George Noory,
Host of the nationally
syndicated show
"Coast To Coast AM"
with our very special
guests Jeffery Smith.
And we're talking about
genetically modified foods.
So at any point, would you feed
your family some of this stuff?
>>SMITH: I know
too much, George.
In fact, I tell you when
I speak to audiences,
I ask them to rate themselves
at the beginning of the talk
how vigilant they've
been in avoiding GMOs.
And most people are
not very vigilant.
40 minutes later, they
don't want to touch it.
Even doctors,
they're immediately
prescribing non-GMO
diets as soon
as they hear this information.
So this does not
get into our house.
>>NOORY: Genetically,
scientifically,
how did they alter the seeds?
How did they alter
the complexity
of what we're eating?
>>SMITH: So let's say
you want to turn a corn
plant into a registered
pesticide, which they've done.
You take a gene
from soil bacteria.
And you isolate the gene
and make millions of copies
and put it into a gun.
Then you shoot that
gun into a plate
of millions of cells hoping
that some of those genes
make it into the DNA
of some of those cells.
Then you clone those
cells into a plant.
And now every single
cell of the corn plant
has a gene-sized
spray bottle which
creates this BT toxin that
breaks open little holes
in human and insect cells.
>>NOORY: What happens when all
those seeds become genetically
modified?
What happens to the
God created seeds
that we have had for
a long, long time?
>>SMITH: Well, GMO means
genetically modified organism,
but could also
mean God move over.
It means let us determine
what's going to be in nature.
In fact, it was one
company's clear goal
to genetically engineer
100% of all commercial seeds
in the world and patent them.
So they're removing the products
of the billions of years
of evolution and replacing
it with designer genes
and designer seeds.
Now when you plant a
genetically engineered corn
plant in one field the pollen
doesn't read the signs.
It's going to flow
over to the next field.
Canola can cross-pollinate
with brassicas,
which is things we
eat like Brussels
sprouts or wild mustard.
And so what we're already
doing is putting genes
into species that have never
existed there in history.
And they're going to
be there for as long
as the gene pool exists.
So they're going to
outlast global warming
and nuclear waste.
They're going to be
a permanent feature.
And so you would think
that before doing that,
they would extinguish
every single doubt
before they released
one outdoors.
And that was the original
theory of the scientists.
And then in comes
the biotech companies
that said we have a
patent on these genes that
expire in 14 or 17 years.
We have to make money on
it before we're ready.
And so they created
this myth that it's
going to feed the world.
It's going to increase yields.
It's going to reduce
agricultural chemicals.
None of that is true.
But it was sufficient
in their marketing plan
to convince and capture
regulatory agencies as well
as the agronomic industry.
>>NOORY: There is a
seed bank in Europe
that governments
are putting seeds
into in the event of a calamity,
>>SMITH: Right.
>>NOORY: If we get
destroyed by an asteroid,
if something just
cripples this planet,
are they genetically
modified seeds?
>>SMITH: No.
>>NOORY: Or they're
God given seeds/
>>SMITH: They don't touch
the GMOs in that vault.
>>NOORY: Why?
>>SMITH: Well, they figured
they want the natural stuff.
>>NOORY: Oh, they want
the natural stuff.
>>SMITH: For our next generation
after the catastrophe,
after the flood, they
get the good stuff.
>>NOORY: Tell me about the most
recent study that has come out.
That the companies that are
creating GMO foods, of course,
are saying, oh,
no, that's wrong.
He's wrong.
What is it?
>>SMITH: The industry
stops its feeding studies
at a maximum of 90 days.
So they feed a rat GM
soy or corn for 90 days.
And if it survives
and it does well,
they figured, OK, let's feed
the GM soy or corn to humans
for a lifetime.
So some independent
scientists in France
decided to extend
a normal feeding
study to two years, a
lifetime of the rats.
In the first 90 days,
everything was fine.
But in the next month, they
started getting tumors.
And by the end of
the study, there
was up to 80% of
the female rats had
tumors of the mammary glands,
up to 50% of the male rats.
They died at two or
three times the rate.
And there was also damage
to the liver, kidneys,
and pituitary gland.
Now this was the most
comprehensive study ever done,
the longest study ever done.
And it should have resulted in
immediate cessation of GMOs.
In fact, Russia banned
GM corn within days.
Kazakhstan did it a month later.
But the biotech industry mounted
an amazing assault saying, uh,
you guys used the wrong rats.
>>NOORY: The wrong rats.
>>SMITH: The wrong rats.
Well, the same rats were
used by the companies
to get their GM crops approved.
They said the rats
are prone to tumors.
But the control groups
only had 20% tumors.
And it was those that were fed
the genetically modified corn,
Roundup Ready corn,
with or without Roundup,
or even the Roundup
without the corn,
they all had dramatically higher
levels of tumors, early death,
and organ death.
>>NOORY: And Jeffrey, I assume
there are no studies done
on human beings yet.
Are there?
>>SMITH: One study.
As we mentioned, it
showed that the genes
from soybeans-- you see the
soybeans are Roundup Ready.
They won't die when
sprayed with Roundup.
The gene transferred into
the DNA of the gut bacteria.
And the gut bacteria was
unkillable with Roundup,
suggesting that the Roundup
Ready gene was producing
the Roundup Ready
protein continuously
inside our digestive tract.
And as soon as this--
[CLEARING THROAT]
>>NOORY: You must have had
some genetically modified corn,
Jeffrey.
>>SMITH: I think so.
Just talking about it is making
me sick, I'm telling you.
They never actually
followed up to see
if the BT gene transfers,
if other genes transfer.
They immediately cut
all funding to it.
This was a UK government
that was very pro-GM.
So we don't know the medical
implications of this.
But there's no human
feeding trials, really.
>>NOORY: Unbelievable stuff.
You know, we're going to go
through some of the products
that you've brought
us that are good.
But very quickly, when
someone's in a supermarket--
because these are not labeled--
how in the heck do you know?
>>SMITH: Well, we have
a Non-GMO Shopping Guide
at nongmoshoppingguide.com which
has over 4,000 products that
are verified.
It's also an iPhone
application called Shop No GMO.
Free.
But generally, you
can buy organic.
You can buy products
that say non-GMO.
Or you can avoid the
at risk ingredients.
Now, there are nine genetically
modified food crops--
soy, corn, cottonseed
oil, canola oil,
sugar from sugar
beets, alfalfa--
which is used for animal hay.
Then there's papaya from
Hawaii or China only,
and a little zucchini and
some yellow crookneck squash.
If it doesn't contain one of
these genetically modified
crops, then it's not a
genetic modified crop.
>>NOORY: Then you're OK.
>>SMITH: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Is it
weird to walk around
with a list in a supermarket
or is that smart?
>>SMITH: You know,
it's a survival guide.
It's like we have people
that walk around with the app
and look at the particular
brands to see which is non-GMO.
But once you figure
it out, it takes
a couple of weeks,
maybe a month,
and you know which
brands are safe.
Then you don't have to walk
around with the app anymore.
You've then replaced.
A lot of people get to what
I call the cupboard stage.
When they realize that
eating a corn chip
might turn your intestinal
flora into a living pesticide
factories, they just
throw things out out
of their cupboard and say
we're going to be replacing it.
>>NOORY: We're going to be back
in a moment, "Beyond Belief."
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Welcome back to "Beyond Belief."
Jeffrey Smith, our guest on
genetically modified food.
So you brought us some presents.
>>SMITH: I did.
>>NOORY: The good stuff to eat.
>>SMITH: Yes.
>>NOORY: How do we know
what the good stuff is?
What did you bring us?
>>SMITH: Well, we
have the GMO cookie.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>SMITH: And then we
have the non-GMO cookie.
It says made with
organic almond flour.
>>NOORY: But the
GMO cookie looks
like it will taste better.
>>SMITH: Yeah, well, yeah.
It's non food to me.
And then we have the
genetically engineered chips.
non-genetically engineered
chips.
This says Non-GMO
Project Verified.
So you can look and it also
says made with organic grains.
So either one of those tells you
that it has no intentional GMOs
and that the process was
designed to avoid GMOs.
>>NOORY: Does every package
that is non-GMO say that?
>>SMITH: No, you see
you can go to a store
and find tomato sauce
that has olive oil.
And you can find tomato sauce
that has high fructose corn
syrup and soybean oil.
And it doesn't say
non-GMO for the olive oil.
But we know that olives are
not genetically engineered
and soybeans--
>>NOORY: Yet.
>>SMITH: Yes.
Yet.
And if we let our
guard down, then there
are olives that are
genetically engineered.
And virtually every
single product
is genetically engineered at
some place in the pipeline.
>>NOORY: And so it
says right here, right?
>>SMITH: USDA Organic.
>>NOORY: And then you know
that you're in good shape.
>>SMITH: And then
also on the top here,
it has the Non-GMO
Project Verified seal.
So either way.
>>NOORY: OK.
But you have to look.
>>SMITH: Yes.
Yes.
You have to look.
Especially if you
know there's corn,
if you know there's what we
call an at risk ingredient,
then you have to make sure it's
either organic or says non-GMO.
And Non-GMO Project
Verified is the best label.
>>NOORY: All right.
So, Jeffrey, what if you
want to go and buy a steak?
How do you know that that
cattle, that beef, whatever
that animal was wasn't
eating GMO foods?
>>SMITH: Well, it would
have to be an organic steak
or you'd be in
trouble, or 100% grass
fed where no alfalfa was used.
So 100% grass fed
used to mean non-GMO.
But because alfalfa is now
genetically engineered,
it might have been introduced
in that particular pasture.
Now people ask is it
safe to eat animals
that have been eating GMOs?
Well, we know that Roundup
binds with nutrients making
them unavailable to plants so
that Roundup Ready crops are
nutrient deficient.
We know that the livestock
in the United States
eat mostly Roundup Ready crops--
soy, corn, cotton meal,
canola meal, sugar beet pulp,
and alfalfa.
So there's now being reports
of universal deficiency
of certain minerals
in the livestock.
When there's not enough
minerals, they get sick.
Also the Roundup
directly can be toxic.
And the lab animals
that have been fed GMOs
have been showing
immune system problems,
reproductive problems,
gastrointestinal problems.
So we're eating animals that
are nutrient deficient and sick.
Now you can decide
whether you think
that's going to
be healthy or not.
I think it's not as
healthy as eating animals
that are themselves healthy.
So this is an area where
if you are a meat eater
and you want to avoid eating
meat that has been eating GMOs,
it's a little
harder than avoiding
the direct derivatives, because
there's very few options
for organic meat out there.
>>NOORY: Do you
know sometimes when
you wake up in the morning,
you just feel great.
You're ready to take on the day.
And then other days you
wake up and you don't feel
that hot for whatever reason.
And you say to yourself,
I know I'm not sick.
I didn't do anything
different yesterday.
What's wrong with me?
Could it have been because
you may have eaten some GMO
foods the night before?
>>SMITH: Absolutely.
I was at an office of
a doctor who prescribes
non-GMO diets to every patient.
She's prescribed them
to about 5,000 patients.
She said everyone gets better.
It never doesn't work.
I said I've got to
see this for myself.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>SMITH: So I started
interviewing the patients.
And some people
described exactly what
you're talking about, that
they wake up in the mornings
and they just feel
heavy and dull.
And they switch their
diet to non-GMO foods,
and they discovered mornings.
They had a morning
for the first time
and they didn't feel terrible.
And actually the doctor
had it down to a science.
She said for anxiety, and
depression, and heaviness,
and lethargy, it's gone almost
immediately on a non-GMO diet.
For allergies and asthma, it
can take three or five days.
For gastrointestinal disorders,
up to a month and then
some people get
better over two years.
And she could predict it
because she had been doing it
for years with her patients.
>>NOORY: Every once
in a blue moon,
every once in a blue moon, I
will do a little kind of binge.
Right?
>>SMITH: This is a
confessional, huh?
>>NOORY: I have been known
to eat a lot of these.
>>SMITH: Don't do
it in front of me.
>>NOORY: I'm not
going to eat it now,
but I remember eating half a bag
once-- because once you start,
it's difficult to stop.
The next morning, I felt
like someone put a vacuum up
to my mouth and shot
it into me not out.
I mean I just felt sluggish.
And it might have been that.
>>SMITH: And bloating,
or some people talk
about just general indigestion.
See, as we talked about,
if each one of these
is producing a toxic
protein that drills
holes in the human
cells, if there's ways
that undigested food can get
into the bloodstream-- see,
normally, it's digested down
into very, very tiny pieces
before it gets into
the bloodstream.
But if it gets into
the bloodstream
as undigested pieces,
the body reacts to it
and creates an antibody response
which is an allergic response.
And that can create inflammation
throughout the body.
And it could lead to a lot
of different disease states.
But then also you
have the little villi,
the little fingers along
the intestinal walls,
they've been shown to
be destroyed or damaged
by the same toxin that
this is producing.
So you may end up with all sorts
of gastrointestinal disorders.
And the Roundup
Ready soy has been
shown to create a suppression
of the digestive enzymes
in the animals in
the laboratories that
are fed the GM soy.
So now you have a weak,
sick digestive track.
And then you're putting
more food into it.
Of course, you're going to
feel bad if these, in fact, are
happening inside you.
>>NOORY: Well, any seed
that has been genetically
modified to fight an
insect or to fight
a pesticide in some weed
can't be that great for you.
So let me ask you this, is
the genetically modified seed
contained part of that
chemical that would fight off
the weed or the little insect?
>>SMITH: Yeah.
The actual gene that's put
inside the seed that then
replicates into every
single cell of the plant,
it is like a little
spray bottle.
It produces the toxic protein.
>>NOORY: So we could take,
like, a teaspoon of the Roundup
Ready.
What's the difference?
>>SMITH: Well, with Roundup
Ready, it's a little different.
With Roundup Ready,
it produces a protein
that allows the crop to
be sprayed with Roundup.
So the gene doesn't produce
the Roundup the weed killer,
it produces something
that allows the plant
to drink the weed killer and
then deposit a portion of it
in the food we eat.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
That's right.
>>SMITH: Yes.
>>NOORY: A portion of it.
>>NOORY: How much?
>>SMITH: Exactly.
And it is in such high amounts
that smaller amounts than that
can wipe out the gut
bacteria, because Roundup
has been patented, its active
ingredient, as a bio side that
kills the beneficial
gut bacteria.
Now when animals eat so
much Roundup Ready crops,
then it kills some of
the beneficial bacteria.
And their job is to keep
in check the botulism,
the botulism bacteria.
And when these animals
eat the Roundup,
then the botulism
bacteria can expand.
And there is now an epidemic of
botulism in certain countries.
And then the botulism
gets into the food supply.
And they found that
botulinum toxin is now
associated with Sudden
Infant Death Syndrome
and with chronic fatigue.
So we may be seeing Sudden
Infant Death Syndrome
and chronic fatigue
symptoms on the rise
because of the
Roundup Ready crops,
because of how it kills off
the beneficial gut bacteria
in animals and possibly humans.
>>NOORY: What's
the story in India?
>>SMITH: Oh, boy.
>>NOORY: Where farmers had
cows die and it wiped them out.
>>SMITH: In India, there is
genetically engineered BT
cotton.
Just like the corn chips produce
their own toxic insecticide,
so too does their cotton
seeds and their cotton plants.
So first of all, the
farmers touching the cotton
are getting rashes and
itching all over their bodies.
They allow their animals
to graze on cotton plants
after harvest.
They've done that for years.
>>NOORY: Animals eat cotton?
I never knew that.
>>SMITH: They eat the
plants, the plants.
Kind of take the cotton out.
>>NOORY: They take
the cotton out.
>>SMITH: They get the plants.
And I've actually seen it.
I've seen an entire herd of
sheep devour all the cotton
plants after harvest.
But I also visited
a village where
they allowed their buffalo
to graze on cotton plants
successfully for eight years.
But they allowed
their Buffalo to graze
on BT cotton plants, this
toxic producing cotton
plants for one day, and all 13
buffalo died within three days.
They lost 26 goats and sheep.
Thousands of sheep,
thousands of buffalo
have died as a result
of eating the BT cotton.
>>NOORY: Didn't some
of these farmers
commit suicide
because they were so
despondent over what happened?
>>SMITH: Well, the suicide is
from something that's related.
They were convinced
that BT cotton--
this genetically
modified cotton-- was
going to make them rich.
It was going to
have huge, huge--
>>NOORY: They were all excited.
>>SMITH: Right.
So they borrowed money.
They couldn't get
it from the bank,
so they go to the loan sharks.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>SMITH: They buy
at 7% per month.
>>NOORY: The money changers.
>>SMITH: Yes, the
money changers.
And then they buy the
genetically engineered seeds
and the associated chemicals.
And they plant them.
And because genetic engineering
creates unpredicted side
effects, a lot of
the farmers ended up
with yields they were unable
to even pay back their loans.
And so there's been a
vast amount of suicides.
Over 200,000 farmers committing
suicide who planted the--
>>NOORY: 200,000
farmers in India?
>>SMITH: In India.
>>NOORY: Committing suicide.
>>SMITH: Who planted
the BT cotton.
>>NOORY: Because they're
financially ruined.
>>SMITH: Exactly.
Because they're going to give
up their land that they've had
in their family for generations.
It's a tremendous
source of shame.
They can't pay for the
dowries of their daughters.
They don't want to
deal with that shame.
So they drink the pesticides.
>>NOORY: And the money
changers now own the land.
>>SMITH: Right.
>>NOORY: And is this continuing?
>>SMITH: It is.
In fact, there was
one biotech company
that was kicked out
of a state in India
because of low performance.
>>NOORY: But why doesn't that
get publicity in this country?
That's a huge story.
>>SMITH: There's been kind of
a lockdown of the mainstream
media.
That's been going
on for 15 years.
>>NOORY: Well, we've
got to change that.
Let's take some questions
from our audience right here.
We'll take some of your
questions for Jeffrey Smith.
>>AUDIENCE: My question
would be regarding
the soil and the groundwater.
So when you have
these GMO plants,
are they studying
how much is actually
getting into soil and,
subsequently, groundwater?
>>NOORY: That's a
great question, Jeff.
It permeates into the
system, doesn't it?
>>SMITH: Yes.
The entire biosphere
is being affected.
These crops get
drenched with Roundup.
More than 80% of the GM
crops are herbicide tolerant.
And most of that
is Roundup Ready.
Now Roundup kills the
beneficial bacteria in the soil.
It promotes soil-borne
pathogens, diseases,
that overrun the crops.
So the use of Roundup with
such high, high, millions,
and millions of
pounds of Roundup
has promoted more
than 40 plant diseases
as a permanent feature
now of US agriculture.
It also kills some of the
bacteria which creates
the spongy absorption quality.
And so you end up with
Roundup Ready fields
where the water doesn't go down.
It remains in puddles
and washes off,
which can promote flooding.
And the Roundup
can remain active
in the soil for months or years.
The longest recorded
half life for degradation
of its active
ingredient was 22 years.
Then you have the BT
toxin which kills off
certain aspects of the soil.
That binds with clay
and can remain active
for months or years.
And then the Roundup can
get into the water supply.
It's actually in
the air samples.
It's in the rain samples.
It's in the surface water.
>>NOORY: It's everywhere.
>>SMITH: It's in the
urine of city dwellers.
It's in the blood of pregnant
women and their unborn fetuses.
And then you have the
BT toxin which gets
washed into the river system.
And that kills
caddisflies, which are
part of the marine ecosystem.
And so it is changing the
entire ecosystem in the soil,
in the water, and
in the marine life.
>>NOORY: How did
this happen so fast?
>>SMITH: Well, we have 94%
of the soybeans in the United
States are genetically
engineered.
>>NOORY: 94%.
>>SMITH: 93% of the cotton,
95% of the sugar beets.
I mean it's huge.
When they take over,
they take over.
And it's sort of like I've
traveled to 34 countries
and I have been amazed at
how the biotech industry has
had a incredible influence
all over the world.
They capture certain
ministers of agriculture--
>>NOORY: Oh, the
lobby must be huge.
>>SMITH: It's amazing.
And I've talked to
people that said
when they were meeting
with a biotech company,
they said, oh, you
should be paid.
You should have a very
high paying job with us
after you finish your work here.
Their work there was to
approve the company's products.
And the job was
going to be a reward.
In Canada, when bovine growth
hormone was being evaluated,
the scientists there said
that they were offered a bribe
by the company of $1
million to $2 million
to approve it without
further study.
Indonesian officials,
140 of them,
were given bribes or
questionable payments.
And there was a
fine to the company.
>>NOORY: Have you ever been
approached to get bought out,
to shut you up?
>>SMITH: No.
But I'll tell you
what, I'm thinking
that I have to have a price.
You know?
If they can give me so
many millions of dollars
that I can then give
to our Institute
for Responsible Technology,
I'll walk and let
the millions of dollars.
>>NOORY: So if you turn
down an interview next time,
I'll know what happened to you.
>>SMITH: I have a price.
>>NOORY: Let's take some more
questions from the audience
here.
Yes, go ahead.
>>AUDIENCE: Hi.
I've listened to Jeffrey Smith--
George Noory, I usually
listen to him on YouTube
and it's great when I
can't stay up all night.
My question is so if you
eat a lot of GMO foods.
You start getting sick.
Your doctor tells
you not to eat them.
Can you get rid of
the GMO, the poisons,
the toxins out of your
system from eating them?
>>NOORY: And first
of all, Jeffrey,
the doctor probably
won't tell you not
to eat it because most of
them aren't aware of this.
>>SMITH: Thousands of doctors
prescribe non-GMO diets.
But many, many more have never
really heard of the problem.
Now it's a very common question.
What about the gut bacteria
that I have that might be--
>>NOORY: And how
long does it stay?
>>SMITH: How long-- we
don't know the answer
to that question specifically.
But we do know that people are
getting better dramatically,
very quickly from a variety
of diseases and disorders
when they switch to non-GMO.
When mice were fed genetically
modified soy for eight months,
they had damage to their
testicles, to their pancreas,
and to their livers.
When the same mice were
switched to non-GM soy
for the next month, a lot of
the damage started to reverse.
We talked to a pig farmer who
had massive problems with birth
defects, ulcers, bloat,
diarrhea, low conception
rates, low litter size.
Took the same animals off of
GM soy, put them on non-GM soy,
and all of that reversed.
We saw animals in
South Africa that
were put on GM soy,
massive health problems.
They put them on--
I mean corn.
They put them on non-GM corn,
the problems disappeared.
The guy ran out, had to
go back to the GM corn.
The problems came back.
Then found that the
source of non-GM corn
permanently and the problems
were permanently gone.
So there is a correlation
very, very rapidly
in switching the diet and
changing the symptoms.
>>NOORY: And that's important
because if you're off it
for a while, your system
could clean itself out.
We don't know what it
means, though, long term.
That's the problem.
>>SMITH: And some
people tell me they
can eat soy and corn in Europe,
but not in the United States.
In Europe, it's non-GMO.
>>NOORY: And we're going
to come right back.
"Beyond Belief," right
here with Jeffrey Smith.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And welcome back to "Beyond
Belief" with Jeffrey Smith,
our expert on genetically
modified foods.
Jeffrey, do you ever
wake up in the morning
and feel like somebody
is watching you?
>>SMITH: You know,
I wouldn't put it
past the biotech industry
or their enforcement ring
in Washington to
be reading my email
and listening to my phone.
But I just don't pay
attention to that,
because I'm pretty much
open with everything
that I say and do.
Sometimes whistleblowers come to
me with pretty hot information
and I have to make sure that
their information remains
protected.
But you know, right now,
there is a wave going on.
There is a huge wave
of anti GMO sentiment.
And now I'm just
riding the wave.
>>NOORY: What has
been in your career
the most heartening story
related to all of this
that you've ever heard?
>>SMITH: Well, it's interesting.
I was on your show on
September 16, 2003--
>>NOORY: Well, you
remember the dates.
>>SMITH: Yeah, because it
was like a week after--
>>NOORY: You've probably
been on 40 times already.
>>SMITH: That's true.
And in the spring
of the next year,
someone came up to
me in a bookstore
and said I listened to
you on "Coast to Coast"
and it changed my life.
And it was the first
time I had heard that.
I've heard it many
times since then.
People come up to
me and they just
started to cry because they say
that the information that we
presented saved their
kids or something.
But this was the first time.
And it was like a revelation
that what I'm saying
is translating into people
changing their diet.
And that's translating
into people
feeling better and
being healthier.
And it's changing their lives.
So thank you for
that opportunity.
And it gave me an
opportunity to really feel
the blessing of that person.
>>NOORY: Well, but the
thanks it goes to you,
because you're the one
who sticks your neck out.
And we're merely
the facilitators.
You know, I've got to thank
Gaiam TV and everybody who's
here to have the guts to want
to get this kind of information
out.
We know how big
the lobby can be.
We know how strong
they are financially.
But there is a huge difference
between what's right
and what's wrong.
And I'm concerned about my
children, and my grandchildren,
and the kind of planet we're
going to leave behind for them.
And it is so important that
we at least give people
the opportunity to make
up their own minds.
You know, I'm not
going to be the one
to say buy genetically
modified foods, don't buy it.
That's up to you.
You know, when people
come up to me and say,
do you get flu shots, George?
I say, no, I don't.
But that's up to you.
If you want to get a flu
shot, you go ahead do it.
It's the same with this.
We need to give people
the information.
They need to be able to look
at packages like this and say,
all right, it
doesn't contain GMO,
I want to buy it or I don't.
Maybe that ear of
corn that is GMO
only costs $0.05
an ear as opposed
to a one that is organic
that might cost $0.15,
but let them at least
make up their own minds.
And that's what's so important
about what we're doing here.
And we're not going
to stop doing that.
With all that, as you look at
this, what's the future hold?
What does your
crystal ball tell you?
>>SMITH: Well,
there are 30 states
that have
organizations that want
to create mandatory labeling
bills or ballot initiatives.
There were 19 bills introduced
in the last 12 months.
None of them got passed
the influence, peddling,
and lobbying of the
biotech industry--
even blatant threats to sue
Vermont or Connecticut--
if they required labeling.
But now, it's on fire.
Right now, I have never
seen the kind of enthusiasm,
and deep education,
and knowledge
that people have about
GMOs in the United States.
As I spent 3 and 1/2 months
traveling up and down
California, people were
devoted to this issue.
It was front and
center for them.
And I think it should be,
because when in our lives
have we been dealing
with a technology
that it could affect
every living being
and all future generations?
Except for all out
nuclear war, there's
nothing like this that has the
imprint or the impact on so
many things.
And so we have
now an opportunity
to do greater good
than our ancestors had
by stopping this, because
we can then protect,
all living beings, and
all future generations,
and your grandchildren, and your
great-great-grandchildren, et
cetera.
So that is dawning on
the minds of people
who are now aware of this.
And I mean there's
religious groups that
think GMO means God move over.
And we have a website
Faith and GMOs.
It's like a joke.
We had a rabbi, a
swami, and three priests
walk into a studio.
And we did.
We videotaped them.
And they're all basically saying
this is against God's plan.
So my prediction is this--
I think we are going to
see mandatory labeling,
because I think
some of these states
are going to be successful.
And I think either way,
there are so many people
avoiding GMOs, looking
for the voluntary labels
that we're going to see economic
pressure on the companies.
And they're going to say, OK,
we started to lose market share.
We don't have to keep GMOs
because there's no consumer
benefit.
We've already got rid of bovine
growth hormone out of Walmart,
Starbucks, Yoplait, Dannon,
most American dairies
because of the link to
cancer from the drug-injected
into cows.
We can see the same
kind of tipping point.
And I think it will happen
very soon in the United States.
>>NOORY: I was going to ask you,
why aren't these companies that
are making products like
this, that are making cookies
like this, why aren't they
stepping up to the plate
right now and saying we're
not going to accept this?
We don't want your GMO products.
We're going to put in
natural ingredients.
It is price?
What is it?
>>SMITH: Well, right now, if
you just buy commodity corn,
it's genetically engineered,
because it's been mixed in.
If they want to go to non-GMO,
they'll have to pay extra.
If everyone goes
to non-GMO, there
won't be a price difference.
But the same companies
removed GMOs in Europe
and didn't charge
consumers more.
It's not going to raise
prices, if they switch.
The same ADM and
Cargill, et cetera,
they already have non-GMO
availability for soy and corn,
they'll just expand that
and make it more available.
So the industry will adjust.
It's not going to be a
big economic problem.
But they just like
the status quo.
They just said we'll just hide
the fact that we're using GMOs.
In fact, the major
food companies
contributed to over $47
million spent in California
to disinform people
so that they can
continue to hide the fact
that they're using GMOs.
>>NOORY: The supermarkets
that coin themselves
as being natural or organic, do
they still sell GMO-type foods
somewhere in that store?
>>SMITH: Yes.
There are some stores that have
eliminated GMOs completely.
But they're the exception.
Even the natural supermarkets,
maybe most of their products
are non-GMO, but they haven't
yet eliminated the GMOs
as a policy.
>>NOORY: So again, the
consumer needs to sort through.
So an event at the
store which normally
would have taken 20 minutes
could take an hour, maybe two.
>>SMITH: The first
time, the second time.
You basically, you
learn the brands
and you know where to go.
So it may seem like
a daunting task.
It was interesting.
I was being interviewed
on another TV show
and the guy said he tried
to get his parents to switch
their foods for years.
And so they gave
him one of my DVDs.
And then the father
who was on the set
said, and the next day, I
didn't recognize anything
in the refrigerator because
his wife had seen it
and replaced everything.
>>NOORY: Look, my son's wife--
they have two little
grandchildren.
They're living in
St. Louis right now--
has taken the two little
kids, three and one
off sugar, which I'm convinced
was genetically modified sugar.
And she said, Grandpa George--
they call me Papa Giorgio--
what a tremendous difference
that we saw in one day
after taking them
off stuff like that.
>>SMITH: Well, Papa Giorgio,
it works like that all over.
It works like that all over.
And sugar, most of the
sugar, is sugar beet sugar.
Sugar also by itself.
I mean even if it weren't
genetically engineered,
it has some particular--
there's a lot of reactivity
among many children.
But right now, children
are most at risk
from the potential
dangers of GMOs.
They don't have a developed
blood-brain barrier.
They don't have
developed gut bacteria.
They eat more per pound.
They have more reactivity
to toxins and allergens.
And what are we seeing
in the next generation?
I have pediatricians
lining up saying
we're seeing complex
diseases that we've never
seen before in children.
Crohn's disease, irritable
bowel, allergies,
allergic to everything, and
these are, what we think,
are the canaries
in the coal mine.
These are the people who
are reacting to the GMOs,
to the leaky gut, to the
toxins in the food supply.
And so this is
where I think we're
going to see the greatest
resistance and the greatest
change--
parents protecting their kids.
>>NOORY: I would say
that our "Coast to Coast"
audience and our Gaiam TV
audience, they understand this.
They know the subject matter.
But what percent of the
American public out there,
or people in Canada and North
America, or all over the world
don't understand the
possibilities of GMO foods?
>>SMITH: Well, three
years ago, if you
asked the average
American how many of you
have eaten a genetically
engineered food in your life?
60% say no.
>>NOORY: 60%.
>>SMITH: 15% say I don't know.
And they say it while
they're reading a GMO.
>>NOORY: Oh, that's crazy.
Jeffrey, give us your websites.
People want to
get a hold of you.
>>SMITH: Sure.
>>NOORY: Where do they go?
>>SMITH:
Responsibletechnology.org,
that's the mothership website.
You can get free
materials and sign up
for the newsletter, et
cetera, get speaker training.
Nongmoshoppingguide.com
helps people
avoid GMOs, or the iPhone
application Shop No GMOs.
We have a religious site
now, Faith and GMOs.
And we also have a new
movie, "Genetic Roulette:
The Gamble of Our Lives" at
geneticroulettemovie.com.
And finally, for books
and DVDs, et cetera,
seedsofdeception.com.
I'm sure there's too many
to put on the screen,
but we we're loading up.
>>NOORY: They'll do it.
And let's hear it for
our guest Jeffrey Smith.
Jeffrey, thank you my friend.
>>SMITH: Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
>>NOORY: So there you have it,
genetically modified foods.
Next time you go to the
store, see if you can find out
exactly what you're eating.
And thanks for being
here on "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]
We need to give people
the information.